0.
Like to Tinker? NASA's Looking for You

STEVE JONES doesn't have a workshop, exactly, for his miniature space elevator; he is designing it in his dorm room and in four labs scattered across the University of British Columbia.


He doesn't have a staff, either; a collection of friends and fellow space enthusiasts volunteer to help. And his budget, in the low five figures, comes mostly from the school activities fund, although Red Bull is donating some energy drinks.


But he might soon have a chance to join the ranks of the aerospace establishment by getting money from NASA and, in his own way, helping explore the solar system. To get ready, he is spending 60 hours a week on his elevator, which is meant to haul people and gear into orbit without a rocket. He has even put off graduation until the project is done.


Until recently, the chances that a college senior like Mr. Jones would contribute to the NASA space program were remote. Contracts belonged mostly to the Boeings of the world. Tinkerers and students were kept at the far edge of the periphery. But with budgets tightening and the obstacles to human space exploration looking more daunting, NASA is enlisting the expertise of outsiders.


For example, the agency is offering 13 contests, which it calls Centennial Challenges, that anyone can enter. The prizes range from $200,000 to more than $5 million, for building gear as diverse as solar sails, lunar excavators and the tiny elevators.


But more important than the cash prizes, contestants and administrators say, is the opportunity to sidestep the traditional ways NASA has done business and bring some fresh faces to its ranks.


"With a regular contract, a small group of students like us wouldn't have a chance," Mr. Jones said. "This way, anyone with a good idea can contribute."


Mr. Jones hadn't thought much about contests until the X Prize, the $10 million competition to get private spacecraft into suborbital flight. He was drawn to the idea that entrepreneurs could go into space. So when NASA announced its first Centennial Challenges, Mr. Jones signed up.

Competitors in the Beam Power Challenge -- which includes the elevator component -- had to make a two-foot-tall machine powered by light or microwaves that could crawl up a 200-foot rubber-coated fiber ribbon. Space enthusiasts hope that such a machine -- an elevator, of sorts -- could one day reach 62,000 miles into the sky, delivering people and packages into orbit at a fraction of the cost of today's launchings. The winner would be, in effect, one of the space elevator's earliest drafts.

When the contest was held last October, none of the eight entrants made it all the way up the ribbon. But Mr. Jones's Snowstar machine traveled farthest, all of 20 feet. The hexagonal array of solar cells, powering two pairs of rollers that shimmied up the ribbon, was judged Most Likely to Win in the 2006 challenge, set for August. The prize has been increased to $250,000 this year, from $50,000. To win, the climbers must make it up the ribbon in less than a minute. So far, 19 teams have signed up, nearly twice as many as in 2005.

Another well-known high-tech contest, the Darpa Grand Challenge, also had disappointing results when it started in 2004. The all-robot off-road rally, sponsored by the Pentagon's fringe science arm, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or Darpa, attracted dozens of competitors. But none of the vehicles made it past the seventh mile of the 150-mile course, largely because of navigation problems.

A year later, five unmanned cars crossed the finish line. That included robots from leading universities like Stanford and Carnegie Mellon as well as one from the Gray Insurance Company, which had no experience in robotics but whose owners had a personal interest in the competition. The Gray team was one of the last to enter the contest, and it had a major setback when Hurricane Katrina wrecked its New Orleans workshop.

Nevertheless, it beat out vehicles built by leading computer-science researchers and backed by defense contractors. It did so well that it has pulled some employees from the insurance side of the business, allowing them to focus on the company's new venture: robotic cars for the military and other entities.

"I never thought I'd work in defense," said Paul Trepagnier, a software development manager at Gray. "I'm a Tom Clancy fan. But that's the extent. I mean, I'm just a programmer in an insurance company."

Many of NASA's contests also center on robotics. The Telerobotic Construction Challenge, scheduled for August 2007, requires a team of machines to assemble items with minimal human supervision. The idea is to let robots, instead of astronauts, build shelters and machinery on the moon and Mars. In the Regolith Excavation Challenge, set for May 2007, an autonomous machine will have to dig through 24 square meters of simulated moon rock. A separate Regolith Oxygen competition, scheduled for 2008, will be held for robots that can extract oxygen from the stones. Some contests will be held annually; others will be one-time events.

NASA funds robotics research through conventional contracts too, and it uses Small Business Innovation Research grants to back companies outside the industry's mainstream. But the paperwork involved in the innovation research grants, called S.B.I.R.'s, can be intimidating.

"I don't have the grant-writing experience to get one of those," said Matthew Abrams, one of the competitors. "The contest seemed like a better deal. And winning something like this can give us the credibility and the contacts to go after S.B.I.R.'s."

The competitions offer economic benefits to NASA as well. The contestants, not the space agency, pay for the development. The winner of a big technology prize usually spends three times the purse value, said Carl E. Walz, a former astronaut who works in NASA's exploration systems mission directorate.

"Typically in R. & D., you pay as you go," Mr. Walz said, referring to NASA's outlays for research and development. "You pay for failures and you pay for successes. Here, you don't pay until someone wins."

NASA officials say that some of their contractors are worried that the contests could undermine their work for the space agency. NASA already has companies working on gloves for its space suits; why, then, does it need an Astronaut Glove Challenge? Exactly how good ideas from the competitions will be integrated into the space program isn't entirely clear. "We're still writing the book on this," Mr. Walz said.

But within NASA, enthusiasm for the challenges seems to be growing. The agency announced six more contests in February, including $5 million for the first team that can store or produce rocket fuel in orbit and $2.5 million for the builders of a working solar sail.

If they win, both Mr. Jones and Mr. Abrams said they hoped to use their prize money to enter some of these more complex challenges, like the lunar lander competition being held by NASA and the X Prize Foundation.

Gregg E. Maryniak, executive vice president of the foundation, said he looked forward to having them enter. "One of the biggest reasons to do this is to bring in people outside the existing ecosystem," he said.

"Look, a hundred years ago, a couple of pesky bike mechanics from Dayton, Ohio, bested, in effect, the government-funded player, to become the first to fly," he added. "That's why you put on these things: to attract the bicycle mechanics."


1.
Many Common Medications Can Raise Your Blood Pressure

Popular pain relievers and antidepressants, as well as alcohol and herbal supplements, are among the many substances that can contribute to hypertension.


High blood pressure remains a leading cause of death and disability in America today. Nearly half of adults have high blood pressure, and only a quarter of them have their blood pressure under control, putting them at increased risk of heart attack, stroke, dementia, kidney disease and other ills.


Before the coronavirus pandemic, high blood pressure caused or contributed to more than half a million deaths a year in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Those numbers have most likely increased, as blood pressure readings have shot up during the pandemic.

You may have long thought your blood pressure was within normal limits. But in 2017, based on better long-term data, experts lowered the numbers that constitute a healthy blood pressure, resulting in a greater proportion of the population with this risky condition. The former upper limit of “normal” blood pressure, once believed to be 140 over 90 millimeters of mercury, was recognized as too high to prevent serious health problems over time. The current upper limit of normal is 130 over 80, and a blood pressure consistently above 120 over 80 is now considered problematic.


